Hey there what's going on.
Welcome to another session of limitless calculus.
Today we're going to talk about a very cool concept called concavity and it's related to the application
of derivatives.
You'll see why in a minute.
So let's dive into a graph and figure out what concavity is.
So as usual we have a curve.
All right.
So we have this weird looking graph.
And again this is only one function.
I just draw it in different colors to make a point.
And what's interesting here is that look at the pink part.
Well it kind of looks like it has a hole but towards the bottom right in the same way.
This one has a hole but pointing towards the top.
So this is pretty much what concavity is.
It's like a shape.
Right.
And a graph can be concave up or concave down.
So when we say that a graph is concave down it looks like this.
So it opens downward.
See that you see this big hole over here.
So the hole is pointing down.
This is concave
down
and on the other hand we have this blue piece right here which actually seems to be opening up so this
blue one here actually opens up
and of course it's called concave up.
So as you can see a graph can have intervals where it is concave down like up to here and then where
it is concave up like up here.
So remember how a graph can have intervals that are increasing in other intervals that are decreasing.
Same concept here.
Some intervals can be concave down some others can be concave up or the graph can be concave down everywhere
or a concave up everywhere.
So let's jump in to the definition for each of these terms.
All right so here we have the first type of concavity.
There are only two types either concave up or a concave down.
So a graph is concave up if it opens upward and re-open.
We're talking about what I showed you in the last slide.
Let me show you again and this time I'll show you with a graph that is always concave up.
All right.
This one is never a concave down.
And the best example of a graph that's always concave up is a parabola.
And remember a parabola is the graph of a quadratic function.
It kind of looks something like that like a big U.
All right.
And where is this opening up towards.
Well the bottom part here is closed but the top part is open right.
So this function is opening up towards the top that's where you have an opening right here.
All right.
So this graph is concave up
and actually this one is concave up everywhere.
All right.
This parabola is never a concave down.
Cool.
All right.
So let's go to the counterpart of concave up which is of course concave down.
So here we have concave down a graph as concave down if it opens downward.
And again we're going to do a parabola but this time we'll do an inverted parabola.
So one that opens down.
Let's say our parabola is actually something like this
care.
So again where does this parabola open towards.
Well the top right here is closed.
So you have an opening towards the bottom.
Therefore this graph actually opens downward.
So it is concave
down.
So in general concavity measures where the graph is opening up towards either up or down.
Now we just went through an example of a function that's always concave up and one that's always concave
down.
Let's review one more time a function that is both concave up and concave down for different intervals.
OK so concave up and down a graph can be concave up for some intervals and concave down for others.
Let's go ahead and check out a graph that is both concave up and concave down.
So the pink will be the concave up part
and the blue will be the concave down part.
And then we'll have a little bit more concave up
and then finally a little bit more of concave down up to infinity and concave up and this side up to
infinity.
All right so check it out.
This pink part is concave up because the opening is toward the top the blue part.
On the other hand is concave down because the opening is towards the bottom.
Again this pink one is concave up because it is opening towards the top.
And this one is concave down because it is open towards the down direction or downward.
All right.
So just to summarize.
Pink is up.
And blue is down.
So up and down
and this may look really familiar to you because remember that for increasing and decreasing intervals
we kind of had the same thing.
So we had some intervals where the function was increasing and some intervals where it was decreasing
You could have you know alternating intervals.
You have one increasing one decreasing one increasing one decreasing etc. etc. So it's kind of like
the same thing.
And you'll notice that the process for finding the concavity of a graph is identical to the process
of finding intervals of increase and decrease except for one difference and that difference is instead
of using the first derivative.
We're going to use the second derivative.
Well you might be thinking wait what what is the second derivative.
We'll go into that after our mnemonic.